---
slug: 2024-08-30-are-these-it-myths-valid-in-2024
title: Are These IT Myths Valid in 2024?
pubdate: 2024-08-30
tags: it, myths, career
summary:
  The IT industry, just like any other, has its fair share of myths and legends.
  Today I want to check some of the most frequent I hear.
youtube: https://youtu.be/us90wCEh5T4
---

The IT industry, just like any other, has its fair share of myths and legends.
Today I want to check some of the most frequent I hear.

## I need a science degree and ace math problems

This is something I’ve heard ever since I was a kid. “Programming is all math,
extremely hard at that” is repeated like a mantra even today. While knowing math
will definitely help you spot some patterns (like sigma summation being very
similar to a for-loop), it definitely won’t save you the time you need to put to
learn to program.

That said, as you go, you will pick up things that are bound in mathematics. If
you dive into more, let’s say, scientific part of programming, you will
definitely make use of linear algebra, game and complexity theory. If you dive
into more visual part, you’ll need some geometry to describe objects you’re
working with.

But, do you need a degree to work in IT? No. Simple as that. I don’t have a
degree, and a lot of my colleagues don’t have one neither. Sure, people have
PhDs and it certainly won’t be a burden, but it’s far from required today.

Some companies, though, will require formal education on principle. This is
something you cannot jump through, but, as time goes by, I see even the most
stubborn ones are relaxing their requirements and often a degree can be swapped
with years of experience. But, you need these years first, right?

## Getting a job is hard, but once I land it, I’m golden

It’s 2024 and the tech industry is in a very weird place. Five years ago,
getting a job as a junior wasn’t _that_ hard. Companies were more willing to
risk hiring someone with lesser knowledge, but great attitude and energy. I
myself hired a lot of juniors, because I knew these folks will be productive
very soon. Today though, it’s not that simple. Interviews are hard to come by,
and when you go to one, it turns out there’s five more ahead, each lasting for
at least an hour, three coding challenges and an open panel.

The fact is, landing a job today is hard, even for more senior developers. I
spoke with a colleague over the weekend and he told me he’s on the market for
three months, and he can count automated rejection emails most likely in
hundreds. Companies are using AI tools, which are far from perfect, to screen
CVs and LinkedIn profiles, recruiters do the same due to sheer amount of
applications.

But if you manage to put your foot through the door, are you golden?

No.

Replacing a developer is easier that it looks, and very often companies will let
go people that are crucial to their operations. For me, letting people go was
always a huge challenge and I always did my best not to let this happen. But I
know managers that will brag about firing twenty-something folks in one day or
will boast on how they cut costs by reducing the team from six to two
developers.

So, what to do to be safe? I wish I knew. Putting good performance is definitely
a good thing, but not a golden rule. As I hate to say it, keeping to yourself is
also a safe bet. As a manager I always encourage people to speak up, but I also
heard many times that I too open or simply to “quit if you don’t like it”.

But! There’s a line between “speaking up” and “being a toxic idiot”, which I,
frankly, understood too late. When I look back at myself, I certainly see that I
wasn’t the easiest to work with, and I oftentimes spill my frustration with
management on my colleagues. This is something that will get you through the
door quicker that you think, because it’s extremely destructive. Having someone
who complains daily hinders team’s morale and acts like a rot, consuming
everything around.

## It’s an easygoing job

So all you need to do is sit calmly and code? Just surf this high payroll wave?
In theory, yes. In practice, it’s taxing as hell.

One thing that you need to understand early is that you are not hired for your
programming skills. Business don’t care if you know ten languages prominently
and can do hard online coding challenges. **Business care for your problem
solving skills**. You are hired to solve problems, such as a need for a
particular feature, a bug that needs to be resolved, or a performance issue that
needs to be optimized.

Your skills will surely contribute to this, but that’s where interviewing using
Leet Code fails: no amount of solved algorithms will teach you to see customer
problems.

And once you do finish a feature, your solution gets deployed. All the clients
will see it, so if it breaks, they’ll know. They won’t know you did it, but it
will hinder the company you work for in their eyes, and this will certainly
leave a mark. It’s extreme pressure, and myself, even after over 15 years of
doing this, am still stressed whenever my changes are going live.

But the satisfaction that everything works perfect and your solution brings
value is unparalleled.

## I will work with new libraries and frameworks

You know now what is important at your job. You see tasks and user stories as
challenges. You spend your free time researching new stuff that might be useful.
And you finally found this one library that can solve the problem you are facing
at your day job. So you send it to your lead, asking if you can implement this
first thing in the morning.

And they say “no”.

Why is this idiot blocking me? Out of jealousy that I found it? Because they
lack knowledge? Or because they are just stupid beyond reason?

All of the above, for sure.

Sometime ago I wrote a piece
“[Real cost of your new library](https://buszewski.com/writings/2019-03-02-real-cost-of-your-new-library/)”,
in which I dive deeper into the conundrums of introducing new technology into a
project. But the gist is, any code that is not authored by the team needs to be
at least known or adaptable by the them. Something perfect for you might not be
so for others, and they might see problems you don’t. Perhaps it’s immature,
poorly documented or has poor performance under a heavy load?

This is where seniority and experience kicks in. It’s the ability to judge
whether a new vendor is a risk worth taking to solve a problem at hand. Cost of
choosing poorly is extremely high, as it will plague your application for
months, if not years. Let’s go back to what I’ve said earlier: your job is to
solve business problems, not to constantly change the insides of the product.

That being said, today’s landscape definitely offers far more battle-tested
solutions that it did ten years ago, so you (most likely) won’t be stuck with
one framework for your whole career. Unless you work in Java, in which case,
happy Spring-ing.

(I really like Spring.)

## I’ll be working on cutting edge hardware

Tech industry seems like **the** place to get your hands on the latest and
greatest hardware, right?

Well, yes. And no.

It all depends on the company you’re working for. Startups often won’t have
money to get you a brand new MacBook Pro with tons of RAM. Larger companies will
fall into two brackets: will give you refurbished computer or will get you a new
one. I had two times when a company asked me for specs and just got me the
hardware. Certainly a great touch, but doesn’t happen that often.

Most of the times, you’ll get someone else’s computer. Maybe the person that had
this position before you. Or just another laptop that sits in that murky room
where only technicians are allowed.

Bottom line is, don’t get your hopes up. I worked with both new MacBooks, and
some decade-old PCs that struggled with Chrome and Sublime Text running
together. There’s no rule telling which you’ll end up using.

—

Tech industry certainly have its fables and legends. A lot of these don’t make
much sense though. My only advice is to keep your mind open and expectations in
check.

Good luck at your job!
